Testing, one, two, three, one, two, three.
This is Wednesday the 30th, I believe.
Say a sentence, please.
Yes, testing.
This is Wednesday, August 30th, in the fifth floor of the Harrington Tower, and I have the pleasure and honor of chatting with Dr. Dean Corrigan, former dean of education here.
To introduce yourself to anyone who might hear this tape or read the transcription many years from now, describe growing up and family background and where you went to school and all that you did before coming to College Station 20 years ago.
Okay.
I was born in a little town of Gorham, New Hampshire, up in the White Mountains region of New Hampshire.
I went to a school which had a graduating class of 24.
My favorite teacher I had for three years, her name was Mary Finnegan.
When she retired from Gorham High School, she went on to
study at Florida State University.
She got a Ph.D.
in philosophy at the age of 83.
I learned that she'd gotten her degree there when I got a letter in the mail from her advisor.
And they had been talking about students they knew and come to find out he was my advisee at the University of Rochester when I was a faculty member there.
And she was my favorite teacher.
She's been a person I keep referring to when I talk.
When someone says what are the characteristics of outstanding teachers, I always use Mrs. Finnegan as my example.
She, unbeknownst to me, made arrangements for the president of Keene State College.
to interview me on his trip through the mountains.
He was, in those days, presidents of small colleges did their own recruiting.
He stopped by and I had no intention of going on to college.
I was from a family of 10 children.
My dad had two full-time jobs.
He was a chemist in a paper mill and then did jobs in the side to support the family, so there wasn't a whole lot of money.
So I said to President Young, I said, I don't think I'll be able to go to college.
I don't have any money.
He said, don't worry about that.
You can wash pots and pans in the kitchen and I'll also hire you on the weekends to do some work for me at my house.
That's how I ended up going to college.
Met people there at the college who helped me get a scholarship after my undergraduate years.
No, where did you go as an undergrad?
King State College, and it's part of the University of New Hampshire system.
And I had about 600 students there in those days.
Some of the professors from Columbia University who were on the faculty, who had graduated from Columbia University,
helped me get a fellowship and scholarship to Columbia to go on after my undergraduate degree to get a master's.
So I went to Columbia University.
Then I went into service.
Then I started teaching in New Jersey in an experimental school dealing with the core curriculum.
Started taking courses for my doctorate at Columbia.
My major advisor there was Dr. Florence Stratemeyer, who was one of the outstanding people in those days at Columbia.
And I also did work in, in addition to curriculum and teaching, I did work in the Department of Educational Administration.
Ended up with a dual doctorate in curriculum and teaching and in higher ed administration.
was offered a position after achieving my doctorate at University of Rochester and also at the same time was being interviewed for a principalship out in California where they were hiring two new principals at the same time to open up two new high schools in San Jose.
I went out there for interviews and
And part of my doctorate was to prepare as a school administrator.
I had been assistant principal as well as teacher in this school that I worked in in New Jersey.
So I called the dean at the University of Rochester and said, Bill, I have this opportunity to go out and be interviewed for this principalship.
It might be a good experience before going into higher education.
if I can get this job and have some experience doing it.
He said, well, don't worry about it.
You go out and do the interviews.
He waited 22 days for me to tell him that I had been offered the job as the principal out there.
So I took the job as principal, and he said at the time,
I want you to do this for me.
If you ever get ready to go into higher education, you call me first.
So the day I decided to leave this experimental high school, which was tied into Stanford out there because we had ended up in a kind of a battle in the community,
I called him and he said, you won't believe this, but we've just been given a Ford Foundation grant to be the first university working with three other universities, Cornell, Syracuse University, and the University of Buffalo to set up an experimental program, inter-university program to prepare school administrators and teachers
in a new model of kind of a fifth year M.H.
Master of Arts in Teaching model.
So he said, and since you've already been interviewed, why don't you come here and direct this new program?
So that's how I ended up at the University of Rochester.
I worked there for eight years, had a wide variety of experiences there, including serving as not only a professor on campus, but director of an urban education center in the city of Rochester after the riots in 1964.
We wanted to develop collaborative programs to move programs ahead after the riots.
And I was given a leave for two years to work with the superintendents on developing innovative programs.
In those days, there was something called Projects to Advance Creativity in Education, funded by the NEA Title III legislation, NDEA Title III legislation.
So we developed a lot of collaborative programs there.
I then went back as associate dean at the University of Rochester.
When the dean decided to retire, I decided I didn't want to be dean at a place where my best friend would be on the faculty and who had been the dean.
I then took a leave to work with the Office of Education.
And to have that kind of Washington experience, I was served as a consultant to a new bureau called the Bureau of Education Personnel Development, and served there for a year, and then went to the University of Vermont as dean.
at a time when the University of Vermont was committed to developing a whole new approach to being a state university.
Had a chance to hire 58 new faculty in two years.
many of whom were just beginning faculty members.
One of the exciting things there was we did away with departments.
We merged education and social work and created a whole new organization for identifying programs, areas rather than departments.
Then I went to the University of Maryland, and then from the University of Maryland here to Texas A&M, where you called me one day and said, how'd you like to come down here and take a look at
Texas A&M, and as you'll recall, I asked you over the phone about this one little clause in the ad in the Chronicle that said that you were looking for an innovative dean.
Someone had, I don't know if I've ever told you this story, someone had put on my desk
this little ad from the Chronicle, and underlined in red was this looking for an innovative dean.
And I asked you at the time if the committee had thought about this or if it was
Somebody just wrote this up, and your answer was, well, why don't you come down and ask the committee?
And so I did.
I had no intention of leaving the University of Maryland at the time.
And you said, why don't you come down?
I told you I was coming to the AACTE meeting in Dallas.
You said, well, why don't you bring your family along?
I came here, met you, met the other people here.
Got really turned on by the potential of the place.
I wasn't looking to be a dean in another place.
I'd already been a dean for 14 years, but this place was too hard to resist.
At the same time, as you recall, you had hired several other new deans.
You provided an opportunity for me to meet with them.
I wanted to meet with the whole faculty.
You created a situation where I could meet with the faculty, not to have them necessarily agree with what I believed, but they ought to know what they were getting.
I thought that that interview process was the best I had ever seen.
It saved about six months of activity.
When I did finally come, we started right where we left off after that process.
I found one of the most exciting faculties I'd ever met.
They were all ready to go.
I think Hubert, in terms of what he had done, was to look around the country, find the best people from the best institutions.
Whereas a lot of the other universities, I think, had had a lot of inbreeding.
This place hadn't had that.
Remember Bob Schutz from Stanford?
People from Chicago, Ohio State, Penn State.
And my feeling was they were just like a spring coiled up.
They were just ready to go if we could take the lid off.
And the climate was just, couldn't resist it.
So that's how I ended up here at Texas A&M.
What did you learn about A&M's image in education?
As you asked friends and others, you must have.
done some searching on your own.
I had known Hubert from participation in the American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education.
And at that time I came here, I was president of AACTE that year.
And from that position, I was able to get a feel for Texas A&M University.
Very young at the time, he was only 16 years old when I came here, so he was the only dean prior to my coming.
So, it was a place that was, you know, looking to develop.
The whole institution was growing.
There was opportunity to not only develop with the College of Ed, but with other colleges.
John Fackler came into the College of Science at the time.
Fallon was in, kind of came into liberal arts.
Bill Muse was dean of the business school.
Bill had done an internship, a President's Fellowship, in the Department of Education at one time.
So I found all these people here who, not just on the faculty, but in other colleges, as you know, from your experience, that the colleges of education
don't always have good relationships with other parts of the university, particularly liberal arts colleges.
And there's always been this kind of competition.
But here, I found that tremendous commitment to the College of Education, they were being equally treated with graduate assistantships, the whole notion of
of working with the state as the state land-grant institution.
The fact that all faculty were on 12-month appointments, just like agriculture and engineering, where many of the courses that educators take are in the summer, so you actually offer more credit hours
in the summertime or in colleges of education than you do during the year sometimes because that's when teachers have their vacations and things like this.
I saw this tremendous commitment to public service as a legitimate activity of the faculty in addition to the research and teaching mission.
there was a real service commitment here and everybody was proud of it.
And of course that fit my own view of what a professional school ought to be in order to inform practice and improve the quality of
programs in the schools, not just through the training of new people, but through the training of career professionals, and found all kinds of support for that idea.
And the challenges.
I mean, here was a place where there was only one minority on the whole faculty of the College of Education, only two African Americans in the whole university.
A college which did not have any bilingual education, English as a second language, the challenges were just unbelievable.
I, being committed to helping institutions move in those directions in terms of diversity, multicultural education, I saw this as a place which had not just commitments, but
a lot of areas that could be worked on.
Who was that minority in his position?
Jesus Garcia.
The day I came for the interviews, his picture was on the front page of the newspaper demanding that the institution do more to recruit minorities.
Where is he now?
He's in Indiana, I think.
In your conversations with the provost,
then I think we called him Vice President of Academic Affairs, Mike Prescott and President Thomas Miller.
What commitments did they make?
Very committed to this, very committed to this university playing a major role in not just changing itself, but
a college of education that was going to be producing teachers for a state where 36% of the kids were Hispanic in the classrooms and 20% African American.
If you didn't have any African American faculty members, they were committed to the whole issue, not just in terms of the institution itself needing to develop in this area, but in terms of preparing professionals in education.
to serve the schools.
And one of the things I bounced off them was the whole idea of Texas A&M having an urban connection.
And through Hubert, they had already been doing a lot with the Houston school districts when Billy Reagan was president, was superintendent there.
And I found that they had a lot of input already.
A lot of the faculty was serving as resources in terms of programs there.
And there was a general
commitment to the idea that we really needed to move on that area.
I had had the same problem in Vermont.
We had no minorities in Vermont, very few in the state.
But I was able to attract nine African-American faculty to Vermont.
And Vermont was a little bit, they were seeking, they changed the charter at the University of Vermont.
And instead of saying we want to accept minorities, they say we want to seek minorities.
Not for the minorities, for the sake of the minorities, but the fact is if they were going to become an institution that was worldly, that was preparing people for the world, they needed to have that popular school student and faculty population reflect this diversity.
So they needed to seek minorities to be a better institution.
That was actually the tack we took here.
We didn't, and that's one of the great stories that's never really been told about the faculty of this college in those early days.
What we did
We did something that when we did it, we didn't realize it was as good an idea as it really was.
You've been through that before.
You do something for one reason and it turns out that it ends up being great.
What we did, we looked at this as an educational question, not an affirmative action question.
And at our first retreat,
We took, we had papers presented, five papers.
I'll never forget, Bob Schutz came in with his paper, and he said, Dean, if I'd had more time, it would have been shorter.
Do you remember, Bob?
And so we had five faculty talk about what they wanted the college to be five years down the road, and a major emphasis in every paper was
We're hypocrites unless we do something about hiring more minorities and seeking more students.
And Jesus and Glenn Johnson and Barbara Stone, you remember the two outstanding faculty who had great integrity with the rest of the faculty, and Jesus, who was our only minority, wrote a paper on why we needed to move in this direction, and the basic gist was
basically that we're hypocrites unless we reflect on our faculty and in our student body the kind of representation in the classes that our students are going to teach in and that our principals are going to lead.
And so we need to move on this as an educational matter to make us better.
The faculty took a vote realizing that the pool of applicants who would come to A&M in a community like this, not in an urban setting,
was going to be small.
So they took a vote, and they voted that if it took more money to hire these minorities than they were making at their rank, they would agree that it needed to be done, which was unbelievable.
This was a credit to the faculty.
So then they put meat into this, the committee, not the dean's office.
went around to every department and had this discussion of this concept paper.
And the first paragraph of the concept paper dealt with the fact that this institution had at one time been segregated.
And there were members of the faculty who remembered teaching minorities off campus.
And they dealt with that.
Well, the faculty, as they had these discussions, decided they didn't want to deal with the past.
They only wanted to be responsible for the future.
So they voted to eliminate the first paragraph, which was good because it gave them something.
You know, go in with two things you want, one thing you don't.
And anyway, so they came up with this concert paper, and then they put meat on it, where there would be a social concert person, which would be the person on any interview committee to assure that minorities were contacted and that they would
not have any committee searches that didn't include minorities.
And of course it was the faculty committees that were doing the searches, not the dean's office, which is, as you know from your experience as president and provost, that it isn't, administration can want to do this entirely, but unless the faculty who do the searches are committed, it doesn't work.
So anyway, they
decided that we needed to move on this, and we had a master stroke.
And the person that thought of it was Dave Erlinson.
Dave Erlinson.
And this was what happened.
He said, if you look at what's happening around the country, and you remember every institution in the country was moving in those days, and this institution had brought in Alexander Aston to look at this and what was happening around the country.
And what was happening was
As the institutes were hiring these new African American or Hispanic faculty, as assistant professors, they were spending so much time advising students, minorities, because there weren't that many of them, that they weren't making it through promotion and tenure.
And so what we decided, the first two hires would be full professors who already had tenure.
who could do a couple of things.
We wouldn't have to worry about their tenure status.
They wouldn't have to.
They would have had enough experience to know the pool of applicants.
And that was the key.
If you had these 50-year-old, 60-year-old white guys on search committees, what kind of access to the pool of minorities did they have?
So we hired Dave Erlandson's advisor from Queens College.
Her name was Robinson.
And she was outstanding, highly respected by the African American community.
And what we found was that especially women African Americans had these contacts through their sororities.
They had these national sororities.
Now, how many white search committees would be going to these sorority meetings?
So we first hired her, and then we hired Hena Hossa, who also had quite a bit of experience.
And then we began to hire.
25 positions in the first five years, we filled 19 of them with minorities.
Within five years, we had Hispanic and African-American faculty in every department.
Outstanding people, too.
Now, we weren't able to keep a lot of them.
What we ended up being was a place where, and a lot of the problem, you know, from having lived here, part of the problem is you get a single female African-American who's 45 years old,
And there's not much place to go in this town for social life, in those days especially.
But we didn't just hire minorities to teach courses in multicultural education.
We hired minorities in science ed.
I can remember
vividly when we hired Julia Clark I got more letters from former students about they thought the institution was going to hell you know and we're not only hiring blacks but we're hiring women to teach science and I can remember one of my exit interviews with one of the
Well, in fact, with Robinson, about the experience here, which was another area we needed to do a lot of work on, which was in terms of the gender area.
We didn't have that many full professors who were women, remember?
Because the place had been all male, and we hadn't built up the pool of people.
Even in the College of Education, we didn't have any full professors who were women.
So we had that issue.
In fact, Robinson told me she had more problems in the Department of Education Administration here because she was a woman than she did because she was African-American.
Not just in the college.
I'm talking about out in the state with other superintendents.
Schell, what was her name, the assistant superintendent for education in Houston, Barbara Schell, she became the first woman superintendent, actually, in the state of Texas.
I mean, that was how, now today, you know, there's a lot more women in the superintendent's roles, and they come out of curriculum and teaching, not
athletics, but those were all challenges, and we never did write up all of this stuff.
I can remember I served on John McDermott, remember, was chairman of the, and Bruce Schaefer was chairman of the Minorities Committee, and I was on it.
and we didn't say much about it because we you know I suppose at the time we could have been guilty of anti-discrimination because we were really hiring people to to provide a talent that we did not have on the faculty now we made sure the people that we hired were outstanding people I mean who could compare with anybody and and we did I mean if you follow up where they all are now
you know, uh, Bri Flores is now dean at the University of New Mexico.
I mean, they're all in, uh, Ruben Donato is chairman of the, uh, is head of the Department of Philosophy at University of Wisconsin.
I mean, all, if you follow up these, all these people, uh, you know, Hosier is head of the department down at the University of Texas at San Antonio.
So our hires were
outstanding people and what we did was for the profession and for higher education and for the cause, we really did a tremendous service.
Describe what it was like for you and family to get settled into this community.
No problem at all because this place is so friendly, the climate anyway.
You got here at what time of year?
In June.
The day we arrived, the day we arrived it was 106 degrees, and Jane had had, as a hobby, collected candles over the years, right?
And the guy who unloaded the truck just happened to leave the box of candles outside.
We had 45 pounds of melted candles by the time we get ready to move in.
But, of course, everyone was so friendly, and I picked that up when I was here.
Now, once I got here, I discovered an interesting thing, and it was explained to me by the president.
One of the first things we did was start a development council.
for the college.
And it was a little different.
It wasn't just to get us money.
It was to connect us with former students and also to have an avenue which we could get input from key people in various areas.
One of the first members of it was Dick Scopey, who was commander of the
space flight there that went down.
His wife was a student, doctoral student in educational psychology.
Yeah, June, Scobie.
And June and Dick ended up starting the math science scholar program, which helped us recruit math and science students.
We were preparing more math and science students
than any other university in the United States at that time.
And a lot of them were funded through scholarships that Dick and Jim, and the way they went about it was really interesting.
Anyway, that's all another story.
But I'll tell you what happened.
I was going down in the elevator with the president of Development Council one day, and I said, geez, people are really nice around here, because everybody got in the elevator to talk to you.
And he said to me, yeah, Dean, down here, we're nice to you, even if we don't like you.
And I said, well, that's it.
One of the two is not bad, you know.
And this is the thing.
And it took me a little while to get used to this and the pace.